README.md, before:

# 🚀🧩 Implementing coverage on QEMU with plugins

The goal of this project is to explore what can QEMU do with plugins and its
viability for fuzzing. The project is made in the context of a Master semester
project under the supervision of Florian Hofhammer, in the HexHive laboratory
at _École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne_, Switzerland.

This project bundles simple targets for testing the plugins that are under
the `targets/` directory.

⚠ This a PoC, not a production-ready tool. ⚠

## Background, and why?

QEMU is a powerful emulator that can emulate a wide range of architectures.
To leverage QEMU for fuzzing, AFL++ has a QEMU mode (`-Q`), based on a
≥4 years old fork of QEMU. While this hasn't been a problem for most users, it
can be interesting to see what are the downsides and upsides of using latest
QEMU versions, leveraging plugins, with AFL++.

Quickly summarized, we have (at least) the following advantages and
disadvantages:
- Slower than the `-Q` mode to the lack of two main things:
  - Improving the FS performance by caching TBs translations (even though, this
    can be achieved.)
  - ~~Forking at a really early stage of QEMU initialization.~~ Now fixed!
- Easier implementation and maintainability of new features, while being
  compatible with a wide range of QEMU versions
- Does not require obscure patches to QEMU

It is also a very good occasion to highlight the excellent work of the QEMU
and AFL++ developers, and to see how they can be combined.

## Project layout

- `AFLplusplus/`: AFLplusplus submodule
- `qemu/`: QEMU submodule
- `Makefile`: self-explanatory
- `targets/`: target programs
- `afl.c/afl.h/afl.o`: used for communication with AFL
- `fs.c/fs.h/fs.o`: used for spinning up the forkserver
- `plugin.c/plugin.so`: the main plugin

About *cmp*-log:

- `afl-cmplog.c/afl-cmplog.h/afl-cmplog.o`: AFL protocol for cmplog
- `disas.c/disas.h/disas.o`: disassembler for cmplog

## Implementation

### Fork server

The fork server is initialized at the initialization of a CPU. The fork server
then waits for a message from AFL to start the target program. Why the fork
server is started at the initialization of a CPU you might ask: it is because
it is the only way to `fork` a process in QEMU from a plugin.

### Coverage

The plugin is implemented in `plugin.c`. For every basic block executed (a.k.a.
translation blocks in QEMU's terminology), the plugin will mark the block as
executed and send the coverage information to AFL.

### `cmplog`

This is a bit more complicated. The plugin will disassemble the basic block and
check what registers, memory and constants are used as operands for each
instruction. On memory access or execution, the plugin will log the operands, 
the result of the operation and forward the information to AFL.

For speed, the plugin will also cache disassemblies of instructions between
the fork server and the forked childs.

`cmplog.so` is built with the `plugin.c` file with the `CMPLOG` preprocessor 
variable defined.

## Building and use

For convenience, AFLplusplus and QEMU are submodules. If not used as submodules,
the initialization of submodules can be ignored. All the commands below are to
be run with the correct path of your QEMU and AFL++ executables.

Requirements:
- `clang` or `gcc`
- GNU `make`
- `nasm`
- `ld`
- `glib-2.0`
- `libcapstone` (for `cmplog`)

Most of those are requirements from QEMU itself.

### Clone

```
git clone --recurse-submodules -j8 git@github.com:Maeeen/qemu-semester-project.git --depth 1
```

### Build AFL-fuzz

```
cd ./AFLplusplus
make distrib
```

### Build QEMU

```
cd qemu
mkdir build
../configure --target-list=x86_64-linux-user
make -j32
```

### Run with coverage only

```
mkdir test && cd $_
mkdir afl-in afl-out
echo prout > ./afl-in/seed
make -C ../ clean
make -C ../ plugin.so
make -C ../ targets/coverage # example target that cheks for "fuzz"
AFL_SKIP_BIN_CHECK=1 ../AFLplusplus/afl-fuzz -i ./afl-in -o ./afl-out -- ../qemu/build/qemu-x86_64 -plugin ../plugin.so ../targets/coverage
```

or in an easy and straightforward way:

```
make TARGET_BIN=coverage fuzz
```

### Run with cmplog

```
mkdir test && cd $_
mkdir afl-in afl-out
echo prout > ./afl-in/seed
make -C ../ clean
make -C ../ plugin.so
make -C ../ TARGET_BIN=coverage-long cmplog.so cmplog-bootstrapper plugin.so targets/coverage-long
AFL_SKIP_BIN_CHECK=1 ../AFLplusplus/afl-fuzz -i ./afl-in -o ./afl-out -c ./cmplog-bootstrapper -- ../qemu/build/qemu-x86_64 -plugin ../plugin.so ../targets/coverage-long
```

The `cmplog` feature is very powerful, with observed little slowdowns compared to
the coverage-only plugin. The above example should find the magic input in mere seconds.

or:

```
make TARGET_BIN=coverage-long fuzz
```

### Details

Once built, the plugin can be loaded with the `-plugin` option of QEMU for coverage. With AFL++:

```
make plugin.so
AFL_SKIP_BIN_CHECK=1 afl-fuzz -i afl-in -o afl-out -- qemu-x86_64 -plugin ./plugin.so <target>
```

As well, you can use the `cmplog` feature:

```
make plugin.so cmplog.so
make cmplog-bootstrapper QEMUPATH=<qemu-path> TARGET_FULLPATH=<target>
AFL_SKIP_BIN_CHECK=1 afl-fuzz -i afl-in -o afl-out -c ./cmplog-bootstrapper -- qemu-x86_64 -plugin ./plugin.so <target>
```

Note the need for a bootstrapper for `cmplog`. This is because `-c` flag for
AFL++ takes only a single argument, and the bootstrapper is used to pass the
plugin path and target path to QEMU.

### Building arguments/targets

Preprocessor variables:
- `DEBUG=0`: disable debug messages
- `TARGET_BIN=<target>`: specify the target binary in `targets/`, used for
  building the bootstrapper.

Targets:
- `cmplog.so`: build the `cmplog` plugin
- `cmplog-bootstrapper`: build the bootstrapper for `cmplog`
- `plugin.so`: build the main plugin
- `clean`: clean the build directory

More for debugging purposes:
- `run`: run the target binary with the plugin
- `run-cmplog`: run the target binary with the `cmplog` plugin
- `dbg`: run the target binary with the plugin in `gdb`
- `dbg-cmplog`: run the target binary with the `cmplog` plugin in `gdb`

Commit message:

Enhance plugin compatibility with previous QEMU versions

README.md, after:

# 🚀🧩 Implementing coverage on QEMU with plugins

The goal of this project is to explore what can QEMU do with plugins and its
viability for fuzzing. The project is made in the context of a Master semester
project under the supervision of Florian Hofhammer, in the HexHive laboratory
at _École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne_, Switzerland.

This project bundles simple targets for testing the plugins that are under
the `targets/` directory.

⚠ This a PoC, not a production-ready tool. ⚠

## Background, and why?

QEMU is a powerful emulator that can emulate a wide range of architectures.
To leverage QEMU for fuzzing, AFL++ has a QEMU mode (`-Q`), based on a
≥4 years old fork of QEMU. While this hasn't been a problem for most users, it
can be interesting to see what are the downsides and upsides of using latest
QEMU versions, leveraging plugins, with AFL++.

Quickly summarized, we have (at least) the following advantages and
disadvantages:
- Slower than the `-Q` mode to the lack of two main things:
  - Improving the FS performance by caching TBs translations (even though, this
    can be achieved.)
  - ~~Forking at a really early stage of QEMU initialization.~~ Now fixed!
- Easier implementation and maintainability of new features, while being
  compatible with a wide range of QEMU versions
- Does not require obscure patches to QEMU

It is also a very good occasion to highlight the excellent work of the QEMU
and AFL++ developers, and to see how they can be combined.

## Project layout

- `AFLplusplus/`: AFLplusplus submodule
- `qemu/`: QEMU submodule
- `Makefile`: self-explanatory
- `targets/`: target programs
- `afl.c/afl.h/afl.o`: used for communication with AFL
- `fs.c/fs.h/fs.o`: used for spinning up the forkserver
- `plugin.c/plugin.so`: the main plugin

About *cmp*-log:

- `afl-cmplog.c/afl-cmplog.h/afl-cmplog.o`: AFL protocol for cmplog
- `disas.c/disas.h/disas.o`: disassembler for cmplog

## Implementation

### Fork server

The fork server is initialized at the initialization of a CPU. The fork server
then waits for a message from AFL to start the target program. Why the fork
server is started at the initialization of a CPU you might ask: it is because
it is the only way to `fork` a process in QEMU from a plugin.

### Coverage

The plugin is implemented in `plugin.c`. For every basic block executed (a.k.a.
translation blocks in QEMU's terminology), the plugin will mark the block as
executed and send the coverage information to AFL.

### `cmplog`

This is a bit more complicated. The plugin will disassemble the basic block and
check what registers, memory and constants are used as operands for each
instruction. On memory access or execution, the plugin will log the operands, 
the result of the operation and forward the information to AFL.

For speed, the plugin will also cache disassemblies of instructions between
the fork server and the forked childs.

`cmplog.so` is built with the `plugin.c` file with the `CMPLOG` preprocessor 
variable defined.

## Building and use

For convenience, AFLplusplus and QEMU are submodules. If not used as submodules,
the initialization of submodules can be ignored. All the commands below are to
be run with the correct path of your QEMU and AFL++ executables.

Requirements:
- `clang` or `gcc`
- GNU `make`
- `nasm`
- `ld`
- `glib-2.0`
- `libcapstone` (for `cmplog`)

Most of those are requirements from QEMU itself.

### Clone

```
git clone --recurse-submodules -j8 git@github.com:Maeeen/qemu-semester-project.git --depth 1
```

### Build AFL-fuzz

```
cd ./AFLplusplus
make distrib
```

### Build QEMU

```
cd qemu
mkdir build
../configure --target-list=x86_64-linux-user
make -j32
```

### Run with coverage only

```
mkdir test && cd $_
mkdir afl-in afl-out
echo prout > ./afl-in/seed
make -C ../ clean
make -C ../ plugin.so
make -C ../ targets/coverage # example target that cheks for "fuzz"
AFL_SKIP_BIN_CHECK=1 ../AFLplusplus/afl-fuzz -i ./afl-in -o ./afl-out -- ../qemu/build/qemu-x86_64 -plugin ../plugin.so ../targets/coverage
```

or in an easy and straightforward way:

```
make TARGET_BIN=coverage fuzz
```

### Run with cmplog

```
mkdir test && cd $_
mkdir afl-in afl-out
echo prout > ./afl-in/seed
make -C ../ clean
make -C ../ plugin.so
make -C ../ TARGET_BIN=coverage-long cmplog.so cmplog-bootstrapper plugin.so targets/coverage-long
AFL_SKIP_BIN_CHECK=1 ../AFLplusplus/afl-fuzz -i ./afl-in -o ./afl-out -c ./cmplog-bootstrapper -- ../qemu/build/qemu-x86_64 -plugin ../plugin.so ../targets/coverage-long
```

The `cmplog` feature is very powerful, with observed little slowdowns compared to
the coverage-only plugin. The above example should find the magic input in mere seconds.

or:

```
make TARGET_BIN=coverage-long fuzz
```

### Details

Once built, the plugin can be loaded with the `-plugin` option of QEMU for coverage. With AFL++:

```
make plugin.so
AFL_SKIP_BIN_CHECK=1 afl-fuzz -i afl-in -o afl-out -- qemu-x86_64 -plugin ./plugin.so <target>
```

As well, you can use the `cmplog` feature:

```
make plugin.so cmplog.so
make cmplog-bootstrapper QEMUPATH=<qemu-path> TARGET_FULLPATH=<target>
AFL_SKIP_BIN_CHECK=1 afl-fuzz -i afl-in -o afl-out -c ./cmplog-bootstrapper -- qemu-x86_64 -plugin ./plugin.so <target>
```

Note the need for a bootstrapper for `cmplog`. This is because `-c` flag for
AFL++ takes only a single argument, and the bootstrapper is used to pass the
plugin path and target path to QEMU.

### Build with your own QEMU

If you want to use your own QEMU, you can specify the path to the QEMU directory
via Make variable `QEMUPATH`:

```
make QEMUPATH=$(pwd)/qemu
```

If you would like to build the plugin with a specific QEMU plugin API version,
note the following:

- coverage has been tested from QEMU v8.1.1 to v9.1.1 (plugin API version 1, to
  4)
- cmplog has been tested only on v9.1.1 (plugin API version 4)

The code will automatically detect the QEMU version and use the correct API if
it is supported.

### Building arguments/targets

Preprocessor variables:
- `DEBUG=0`: disable debug messages
- `TARGET_BIN=<target>`: specify the target binary in `targets/`, used for
  building the bootstrapper.

Targets:
- `cmplog.so`: build the `cmplog` plugin
- `cmplog-bootstrapper`: build the bootstrapper for `cmplog`
- `plugin.so`: build the main plugin
- `clean`: clean the build directory

More for debugging purposes:
- `run`: run the target binary with the plugin
- `run-cmplog`: run the target binary with the `cmplog` plugin
- `dbg`: run the target binary with the plugin in `gdb`
- `dbg-cmplog`: run the target binary with the `cmplog` plugin in `gdb`
